content/posts/2020/how-to-send-email-in-golang/index.md, before:

---
title: "How to Send Email in Golang"
date: 2020-06-11T11:07:11+05:30
description: "Learn how to easy it is to send an email in golang."
categories: ["Golang", "Tutorial", "2020"]
tags: ["golang", "sendemail", "sendinblue"]
cover: https://schadokar.dev/images/sendinblue/go-sendinblue-cover.png #image show on top
readingTime: true # show reading time after article date
toc: true
comments: true
published: true
---

This is a series of tutorials: sending email in golang.
We'll first start with the basic sending an email using the `go` command.

In the upcoming tutorials, we will create an API and a frontend using which we will send emails.

In this tutorial, we will send an email using the `main.go` file.

# Pre-requisites

1. go v1.11 or greater - I am using go1.14.3
2. Code Editor (VSCode, Atom) - I am using VS Code
3. Sendinblue account - [link](https://www.sendinblue.com/?tap_a=30591-fb13f0&tap_s=956728-d372bc)

# Getting Started

Create a new directory `go-sendinblue`.

Open the terminal inside the directory and run the below command.

```go
go mod init go-sendinblue
```

This command will initiate a module `go.mod`.  
A module is a collection of dependency modules used in the project. This will list all the dependencies with their version in the `go.mod` file.

## Add the Dependency

In this project, we are going to use the environment variables from the `.env` file. To access the `.env` file and use it we have to add a dependency `godotenv`.

```go
go get github.com/joho/godotenv
```

This package is simple and clean.  
Learn more about [how to use environment variables in the golang](https://schadokar.dev/posts/use-environment-variable-in-your-next-golang-project/).

## Create a new SMTP Key

Sign in to your Sendinblue account and click on SMTP & API from the top-right menu.

Go to **SMTP** tab and click on _CREATE A NEW SMTP KEY_.  
Copy the key and paste it somewhere safe.

> ⚠️ Note: If you lose this key, then you can't retrieve it. Then you have to create a new one and replace it accordingly.

## Environment Variable

Create a new `.env` file inside the `go-sendinblue` project.  
Open the file and enter the following keys and values.

```js
PASSWORD=Enter your Sendinblue SMTP Key
SMTP_HOST=smtp-relay.sendinblue.com
SMTP_PORT=587
```

Verify the `SMTP_HOST` and `SMTP_PORT` from the **SMTP & API** section of your account.

> ⚠️ Caution: If you're using git then don't forget to add `.env` in the `.gitignore` file. This will prevent your secrets to access by anyone.

## Coding Time 👨‍💻

Create a new `main.go` inside the `go-sendinblue` project.  
Open the `main.go` file and paste the below code.
We are going to use `smtp` package provided by golang.

> Package smtp implements the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol as defined in RFC 5321.

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "log"
    "net/smtp"
    "os"

    // Import godotenv
    "github.com/joho/godotenv"
)

func main() {
    // From address
    from := "hello@schadokar.dev"

    // Array of recipients address
    to := []string{"shubham@schadokar.dev"}

    // Create a message and convert it into bytes
    msg := []byte("To: shubham@schadokar.dev\r\n" +
        "From: hello@schadokar.dev\r\n" +
        "Subject: Hello Gophers!\r\n" +
        "\r\n" +
        "This is the email is sent using golang and sendinblue.\r\n")

    // Call the sendEmail function
    status := sendEmail(from, to, msg)

    // check if email sent successfully or not
    if status {
        fmt.Printf("Email sent successfully.")
    } else {
        fmt.Printf("Email sent failed.")
    }
}

// send mail function
func sendEmail(from string, to []string, msg []byte) bool {
    // Load .env file to use the environment variable
    err := godotenv.Load(".env")

    if err != nil {
        log.Fatalf("Error loading .env file")
    }

    // Set up authentication information.
    auth := smtp.PlainAuth("", from, os.Getenv("PASSWORD"), os.Getenv("SMTP_HOST"))

    // format smtp address
    smtpAddress := fmt.Sprintf("%s:%v", os.Getenv("SMTP_HOST"), os.Getenv("SMTP_PORT"))

    // Connect to the server, authenticate, set the sender and recipient,
    // and send the email all in one step.
    err = smtp.SendMail(smtpAddress, auth, from, to, msg)

    if err != nil {
        log.Fatal(err)
        return false
    }

    // return true on success
    return true
}
```

Let's understand the code piece by piece.

In the `main` function we're first declaring the **from**, **to**, and **msg**.  
**from** is the address from which you created the sendinblue account.
**to** is an array of string.  
**msg** is an array of bytes.

> ⚠️ You must define the **From** field in the msg. It is not mentioned in the smtp package documentation. Maybe it is only required for sendinblue. I have not tested with other mail service providers.

In the `sendEmail` function, it is taking **from**, **to**, and **msg** as arguments and returning a `bool` status.

In the import, we have imported the `github.com/joho/godotenv` package to load the `.env` file. To load the `.env` file, use `Load` method of `godoenv`.
From the `.env` file, we will load **PASSWORD**, **SMTP_HOST** and **SMTP_PORT**.

The `smtp` package has 2 methods to authenticate the mail server. [Read more](https://golang.org/pkg/net/smtp/#Auth)  
We're going to use the `PlainAuth` method.

#### Syntax

```go
func PlainAuth(identity, username, password, host string) Auth
```

> PlainAuth returns an Auth that implements the PLAIN authentication mechanism as defined in RFC 4616. The returned Auth uses the given username and password to authenticate to host and act as identity. Usually, identity should be the empty string, to act as username.

> PlainAuth will only send the credentials if the connection is using TLS or is connected to localhost. Otherwise, authentication will fail with an error, without sending the credentials.

Now, as the `.env` is loaded by the `godotenv` package. We can use `os` package to read the environment variables.

Format an SMTP Address.

```json
smtp-relay.sendinblue.com:587
```

Use `os` package to read **PASSWORD**, **SMTP_HOST** and **SMTP_PORT**.

Using the `SendMail` method of `smtp` package, it can connect to the server, authenticate and send the email the message to all the recipients by the sender.

## Send the email

Open the project in the terminal and run the below command.

```go
go run main.go
```

Check your mailbox. You have received a mail. If you could not find the mail check in the promotion.

![sent-mail](https://schadokar.dev/images/sendinblue/mail-sent-sendinblue.PNG)

The `smtp` package does not provide enough information of delivery of the mail. It only confirms if mail sent to server or not.

From server side, there can be many reasons if it is delivered or not. To check if sent successfully or not.  
Open the sendinblue account and click on the **Transactional** tab.

In this tab, you can check the status of the mail.
The common reason can be an incorrect mail address. For this it raise a **Hard bounce** event.

# Conclusion

Hope, you find this tutorial helpful. The complete code is available on my [GitHub](https://github.com/schadokar/go-sendmail) repository.

In the upcoming tutorials, we are going to create API and a frontend.

---

Commit message:

create an account in sendinblue added

content/posts/2020/how-to-send-email-in-golang/index.md, after:

---
title: "How to Send Email in Golang"
date: 2020-06-11T11:07:11+05:30
description: "Learn how to easy it is to send an email in golang."
categories: ["Golang", "Tutorial", "2020"]
tags: ["golang", "sendemail", "sendinblue"]
cover: https://schadokar.dev/images/sendinblue/go-sendinblue-cover.png #image show on top
readingTime: true # show reading time after article date
toc: true
comments: true
published: true
---

This is a series of tutorials: sending email in golang.
We'll first start with the basic sending an email using the `go` command.

In the upcoming tutorials, we will create an API and a frontend using which we will send emails.

In this tutorial, we will send an email using the `main.go` file.

# Pre-requisites

1. go v1.11 or greater - I am using go1.14.3
2. Code Editor (VSCode, Atom) - I am using VS Code
3. Sendinblue account - [link](https://www.sendinblue.com/?tap_a=30591-fb13f0&tap_s=956728-d372bc)

> Check out this step by step tutorial [Create an account in sendinblue](https://schadokar.dev/to-the-point/create-an-account-in-sendinblue/).

# Getting Started

Create a new directory `go-sendinblue`.

Open the terminal inside the directory and run the below command.

```go
go mod init go-sendinblue
```

This command will initiate a module `go.mod`.  
A module is a collection of dependency modules used in the project. This will list all the dependencies with their version in the `go.mod` file.

## Add the Dependency

In this project, we are going to use the environment variables from the `.env` file. To access the `.env` file and use it we have to add a dependency `godotenv`.

```go
go get github.com/joho/godotenv
```

This package is simple and clean.  
Learn more about [how to use environment variables in the golang](https://schadokar.dev/posts/use-environment-variable-in-your-next-golang-project/).

## Create a new SMTP Key

Sign in to your Sendinblue account and click on SMTP & API from the top-right menu.

Go to **SMTP** tab and click on _CREATE A NEW SMTP KEY_.  
Copy the key and paste it somewhere safe.

> ⚠️ Note: If you lose this key, then you can't retrieve it. Then you have to create a new one and replace it accordingly.

## Environment Variable

Create a new `.env` file inside the `go-sendinblue` project.  
Open the file and enter the following keys and values.

```js
PASSWORD=Enter your Sendinblue SMTP Key
SMTP_HOST=smtp-relay.sendinblue.com
SMTP_PORT=587
```

Verify the `SMTP_HOST` and `SMTP_PORT` from the **SMTP & API** section of your account.

> ⚠️ Caution: If you're using git then don't forget to add `.env` in the `.gitignore` file. This will prevent your secrets to access by anyone.

## Coding Time 👨‍💻

Create a new `main.go` inside the `go-sendinblue` project.  
Open the `main.go` file and paste the below code.
We are going to use `smtp` package provided by golang.

> Package smtp implements the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol as defined in RFC 5321.

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "log"
    "net/smtp"
    "os"

    // Import godotenv
    "github.com/joho/godotenv"
)

func main() {
    // From address
    from := "hello@schadokar.dev"

    // Array of recipients address
    to := []string{"shubham@schadokar.dev"}

    // Create a message and convert it into bytes
    msg := []byte("To: shubham@schadokar.dev\r\n" +
        "From: hello@schadokar.dev\r\n" +
        "Subject: Hello Gophers!\r\n" +
        "\r\n" +
        "This is the email is sent using golang and sendinblue.\r\n")

    // Call the sendEmail function
    status := sendEmail(from, to, msg)

    // check if email sent successfully or not
    if status {
        fmt.Printf("Email sent successfully.")
    } else {
        fmt.Printf("Email sent failed.")
    }
}

// send mail function
func sendEmail(from string, to []string, msg []byte) bool {
    // Load .env file to use the environment variable
    err := godotenv.Load(".env")

    if err != nil {
        log.Fatalf("Error loading .env file")
    }

    // Set up authentication information.
    auth := smtp.PlainAuth("", from, os.Getenv("PASSWORD"), os.Getenv("SMTP_HOST"))

    // format smtp address
    smtpAddress := fmt.Sprintf("%s:%v", os.Getenv("SMTP_HOST"), os.Getenv("SMTP_PORT"))

    // Connect to the server, authenticate, set the sender and recipient,
    // and send the email all in one step.
    err = smtp.SendMail(smtpAddress, auth, from, to, msg)

    if err != nil {
        log.Fatal(err)
        return false
    }

    // return true on success
    return true
}
```

Let's understand the code piece by piece.

In the `main` function we're first declaring the **from**, **to**, and **msg**.  
**from** is the address from which you created the sendinblue account.
**to** is an array of string.  
**msg** is an array of bytes.

> ⚠️ You must define the **From** field in the msg. It is not mentioned in the smtp package documentation. Maybe it is only required for sendinblue. I have not tested with other mail service providers.

In the `sendEmail` function, it is taking **from**, **to**, and **msg** as arguments and returning a `bool` status.

In the import, we have imported the `github.com/joho/godotenv` package to load the `.env` file. To load the `.env` file, use `Load` method of `godoenv`.
From the `.env` file, we will load **PASSWORD**, **SMTP_HOST** and **SMTP_PORT**.

The `smtp` package has 2 methods to authenticate the mail server. [Read more](https://golang.org/pkg/net/smtp/#Auth)  
We're going to use the `PlainAuth` method.

#### Syntax

```go
func PlainAuth(identity, username, password, host string) Auth
```

> PlainAuth returns an Auth that implements the PLAIN authentication mechanism as defined in RFC 4616. The returned Auth uses the given username and password to authenticate to host and act as identity. Usually, identity should be the empty string, to act as username.

> PlainAuth will only send the credentials if the connection is using TLS or is connected to localhost. Otherwise, authentication will fail with an error, without sending the credentials.

Now, as the `.env` is loaded by the `godotenv` package. We can use `os` package to read the environment variables.

Format an SMTP Address.

```json
smtp-relay.sendinblue.com:587
```

Use `os` package to read **PASSWORD**, **SMTP_HOST** and **SMTP_PORT**.

Using the `SendMail` method of `smtp` package, it can connect to the server, authenticate and send the email the message to all the recipients by the sender.

## Send the email

Open the project in the terminal and run the below command.

```go
go run main.go
```

Check your mailbox. You have received a mail. If you could not find the mail check in the promotion.

![sent-mail](https://schadokar.dev/images/sendinblue/mail-sent-sendinblue.PNG)

The `smtp` package does not provide enough information of delivery of the mail. It only confirms if mail sent to server or not.

From server side, there can be many reasons if it is delivered or not. To check if sent successfully or not.  
Open the sendinblue account and click on the **Transactional** tab.

In this tab, you can check the status of the mail.
The common reason can be an incorrect mail address. For this it raise a **Hard bounce** event.

# Conclusion

Hope, you find this tutorial helpful. The complete code is available on my [GitHub](https://github.com/schadokar/go-sendmail) repository.

In the upcoming tutorials, we are going to create API and a frontend.

---
